---
title: Miles Davis and the Trumpet from Heaven
year: 2019
layout: story
---
My love affair with Miles Davis started with a kiss. Of course I didn't actually
kiss the legendary trumpeter myself (though that would have been an even better
story), but rather my girlfriend, Lisa. I was fourteen and had just made it up
to her bedroom for the first time. Needless to say, I had absolutely no idea
what to do next. But Lisa did. She calmly turned on her favorite music, then sat
down next to me on the bed. We turned towards each other. At first I was too shy
to look her in the eyes but there was something in those notes that just
inspired me. So I went for it. As our lips touched, it felt like an explosion. I
was sure that this must be what love feels like. But I was wrong--it was the just
first notes of "The Buzzard Song" from Miles's rendition of *Porgy and Bess*.

All of the energy of that song went into that kiss, and the next, and the next.
By the time we stopped to breathe, Miles was halfway into "Summertime" and
showed no promise of slowing down. We were immediately back at it, and our
make-out session crescendoed as the gorgeous sound of horns enshrouded our very
being. My heartstrings were aflutter from the ineffable mixture of romance and
jazz. Afterwards I went home with a sense of having discovered something greater
than myself, no small order for the narcissist I was.

The next day I felt compelled to go out and buy some of Miles's classics. My
finances at the time were quite limited, but I was able to borrow fifty dollars
from my parents, claiming I needed it for a project for music class. The rest of
the weekend I spent wandering luscious sonic landscapes. *Kind of Blue* was
understandably terrific, but I also enjoyed the darker recordings, particularly
*In a Silent Way*. But how can I really compare such masterpieces?

Lisa called me that evening wanting to meet, but I was able to deflect the
attention with some claims about a school project. She was no jazz aficionado;
indeed she didn't care much for it at all. But she was a true lover of Gershwin
in general and *Porgy and Bess* in particular. Having exhausted all the standard
renditions, she moved on to the jazz versions, starting off with Louis Armstrong
and Ella Fitzgerald's. She had just discovered the magic of Miles's flugelhorns
when I chanced upon her. It turned out well for my love of jazz, but not so much
for the longevity of our relationship.

Lisa and I had originally met in music class, in which we both played the piano.
Rather than competing, as we might have had we been of the same gender, we
formed a close relationship and helped each other practice. Neither of us was
amazing, but we got by. Perhaps all those evenings spent "practicing" could have
been put to better use.

Probably things would have remained that way had I been introduced to jazz
through Herbie Hancock or Jelly Roll Morton. But instead it was Miles Davis, and
Miles played the trumpet, not the piano. Although I had yet to show any sign of
being a musical prodigy, I still decided that I would learn to play some of his
compositions. So I switched instruments.

No one else in our school was a trumpet player. The only trumpet we had clearly
showed the wear of years of neglect by teenagers. It wasn't particularly old,
but apparently its previous owners had used it more often as a weapon than
musical instrument. Still, I practiced diligently that week, and by Friday I
could consistently play a C and sometimes even an F or G.

Progress can be a wonderful thing sometimes, but that wasn't the case for my
relationship with Lisa. She took my abandonment of the piano as a personal
affront, saying that my love affair with the trumpet was more egregious than had
I had one with any of the other girls in the school. So she broke it off.

I was sad at first, but not for long. Before I had met her music was the main
way I escaped the waves of melancholy that I would often feel, unsure where my
life was headed. And afterwards I went back to it with renewed passion. I would
now have more time to practice, and when I became the second coming of Miles I
just knew that willing women would flock to my side. So it was to my dismay that
my progress started slowing down. I knew by then how to play all the individual
notes, but I couldn't coherently combine them into anything that sounded even
remotely like music. Far from being the next great jazz trumpeter it seemed that
I wasn't even on track to pass music class. My teacher, Mr. Sharpe, tried to
help me, but when it came down to brass tracks, it was clear that he didn't know
enough to do more than passively encourage me to practice.

In the meantime, out of all of us Lisa had suddenly become the star musician.
She specialized in playing piano arrangements of pop songs and video game music,
which was hardly fair. After all, who would honestly prefer to listen to my
off-key blaring rather than Lisa's renditions of "Quit Playing Games" or
"Aeris's Theme" from Final Fantasy VII?

The final class project was a public performance in front of the school. Each of
us would choose any composition and play it on the instrument of our choice. And
student applause (or lack thereof) entirely determined our grade. Actually, that
last part wasn't true, but it definitely felt like the feelings of our peers
mattered much more than the panel of judges that evaluated our performance. Of
course, if, like me, all you could emit was twelve sporadic notes in the wrong
sequence then both groups were likely to prove hostile.

Lisa was moved by my ineptitude to forgive her grievances. She caught up to me
in the hall one day and flat out told me to give up the trumpet, not for her,
but so I didn't have to repeat the class. I knew she was right--even without the
past few months of practice I was still a far better pianist. But by that point
she was dating Gary, a ukelelist I despised, and I couldn't admit that I was
wrong, to her of all people.

My lack of progress became so severe that I gave up practicing altogether. While
my parents thought I was playing the trumpet I instead laid on my bed in a
gloomy state, playing Miles's records on endless loop. It felt like being
covered by lead for an x-ray, but all over my body. And the heaviness only
increased as the remaining days passed one by one.

The day before the concert even my clueless parents realized that I wasn't my
usual self. But their remedies were hopelessly worthless. "Cheer up," they said,
and "I'm sure you'll do well", and "We're so excited to see your first concert."
It would have made me laugh if the heaviness hadn't crushed all the joy out of
my soul.

I felt a little better that night. At least, I thought, it will be over soon.
And whatever happens, it's just a music class. It doesn't really matter in the
big picture. This is what I told myself. But I didn't really believe that. It
just seemed like something an outsider would say that had never felt as I did.

I was about to put on *Kind of Blue* to help me fall asleep when I was struck
with an odd idea. I had never been at all religious, had never prayed or gone to
church. But holding that CD with its beautiful album cover I felt compelled to
call upon a force greater than just myself. Instead of placing it in my CD
player I gently lowered it on my chair, then got down on my knees in from of it.
I thought I wouldn't know what to say but as soon as I clasped the sides of the
chair the words started to flow out in a whisper.

"Miles," I said. "Excuse me, but I'm just a lonely boy who found a bit of solace
in your wonderful music. If you are in heaven, up there, smiling, can you spare
some of your inspiration for your most ardent admirer? I just need it for
tomorrow, for the concert. I know I'll never be one millionth of the musician
you are, but one millionth is all I need to be to pass that class. I've never
felt this way about anything or anyone--." I saw quick image of Lisa, walking in
front of me in her usual white sweater and jeans, looking back to give me a
smile, but I shrugged it off. "So just grant me that one millionth part and I
promise I'll be your devoted follower forever," I continued.

I may have said more, but that's all I remember. That morning I woke up on the
floor next to the chair, the CD still arranged neatly in the center of it.
Somehow sleeping on the floor made me feel a renewed motivation to do well at
the concert. I got dressed, ate a hurried breakfast, and was about to head out
the door when my mom stopped me.

"Wow, you really like to cut it close, don't you?" she said.

"What are you talking about? This is when I always leave." I replied. Although
it's true that I was always at least five minutes late, but she didn't know that
(I hoped).

My mom shook her head. "No, you got this delivery early this morning. The
doorbell woke me up," she scowled.

I looked to her hands, which held a beautiful silver trumpet, so new that it
appeared to shine with an eerie light. I walked over to take it but she moved it
out of my reach. "Where did you get this?" she said, "It looks very expensive."

I had no idea what to say, but I just knew I had to have that trumpet. I felt it
must be connected to the events of the previous night, and I couldn't let my
struggle be for nothing. "I won it," I said, "in a contest for musicians at my
school. I guess they felt bad that I had to play on that beat-up old thing. I'm
just glad it arrived in time for today."

Mom seemed to by this explanation. She smiled. "That's amazing," she said. "I'm
even more excited to see you play today." She gave me the trumpet.

As soon as it touched my fingers I felt an electric discharge. I knew
immediately it was exactly as I felt that night with Lisa, our first kiss
coinciding so perfectly with the beginning of "The Buzzard's Song". I didn't
know what to believe, but I knew that something special had happened.

I made my way through that school day in a dreamlike fugue. All I could think
about was playing my new trumpet at the concert. It was the last week of school
so the teachers were already mostly checked out, so no one seemed to notice
much. Finally, the last bell sounded, and I made my way to the auditorium
backstage.

I had been avoiding Lisa and Gary for the previous few months, seeing them only
in music class, in which they sat apart. But now I immediately saw them, holding
hands while sitting on the piano bench. I recognized in her eyes the same look
she gave me that night, that look of excitement mixed with yearning. Until that
point it had been the first day in a long time I hadn't felt the heaviness, but
now I felt it again descending. Quickly, I reached into my bag and took out my
trumpet. It was very visible glowing now, even more than it had been this
morning. I expected everyone around to turn and look at the source, but no one
else seemed to notice. Still, to be cautious, I put it away again.

A few minutes later it was time to being. Mr. Sharpe drew our names from a hat,
and as we were chosen we went up to the stage to play. There was a "recommended"
time of three to five minutes for each performance but it was clear that every
student was trying to skirt the bottom of that range. The first chosen was Ben,
a harpist who played a tolerably-good rendition of Donizetti's Harp solo from
*Lucia di Lammermoor* but got only scattered applause (probably from his
parents). It seemed the crowd was especially hostile today.

Second up was Lisa. She was already fairly popular at school, and even played
one of the student "You've Got a Friend in Me", which resulted in medium
applause. She smiled as she got off stage and sat down right next to Gary. "You
were phenomenal," I heard him say. I wish I had closed my eyes at that moment,
or looked away, or at least blinked. But I did none of those things and so I saw
him give her a kiss in front of all of us. This was followed by whistles from
several members of the class. I expected Mr. Sharpe to say something, but he
just smiled and gave a knowing nod.

After that the heaviness hit me like a train. I took out the trumpet and held it
tenderly, hoping its magic would help me. I don't remember what anyone else
played, I just sat there trying to make it through. I must have been completely
out of it, since the next thing I remember is Mr. Sharpe tapping me on the
shoulder. He kept repeating my name, and I realized that I was the last one,
that it was my turn to play.

I looked down at the trumpet again, and saw it glowing brighter than ever. The
whole room was filled with its pale silver light. Seeing that illumination
suddenly filled me with a peace I'd never felt before. I saw it grow brighter
and brighter until it was blinding. I couldn't see anything, but somehow I stood
up and wordlessly walked out on stage. Or at least, that's what they told me
afterwards. I don't remember any from that point on.

"You were sensational." Mom couldn't contain her words as I showed up downstairs
for breakfast. "I mean I knew you spent a lot of time practicing, but I never
believed--just amazing. I didn't know what to expect but when I heard those first
notes I felt like I was back at my first Miles Davis concert. I used to be quite
a jazz aficionado," she said. "When I was younger," she added wistfully.

But I wasn't listening. Sensational? Could it really be? I truly had no memory
of anything after the glow took me in, but how could I have played that well. I
had barely strung together two notes in practice--did the prayer really work? But
I quickly realized that there was something important I had forgotten. Mom was
still going on about my performance.

"The trumpet," I interrupted. "Where is it?"

"Oh, I think you can take a break from practicing today. I know you love it, but
you've been working so hard these past few months."

"No, mom, I need to return it."

"Return it? But you said you won it."

"I meant, I won it only for that night. It was a rental."

Just then I saw it lying on the counter behind her. The glow had all but
disappeared, but there was still a faint trace of it. I walked over and picked
it up. "I'll be back soon," I said.

I had made a deal with Miles, and now I'd have to live up to my side of the
bargain. I needed to return the trumpet to him. But how? I walked away from my
house, just looking for something that would help me figure it out.

After half an hour of walking, I saw the gleaming water of the nearby reservoir.
As I approached the reflection of sunlight blinded me and I instantly knew what
to do. I walked up to the edge, held the trumpet out at arm's length, and let
go.

When I got home, Mom was waiting for me. "I was thinkingâ€¦ I know that a good
trumpet is very expensive, but I want to support you. I wasn't sure before
yesterday, butâ€¦"

"No," I interrupted. "That was the end. No more music for me."

"That's so sudden," she said. "But if you're sureâ€¦"

"I am. Next year I'm going to join math club instead. And then maybe Lisa and I
can go back to being friends."

Mom gave me a puzzled look. "Don't you remember we all had dinner together last
night? And her parents mentioned moving away next week. They want to live closer
to the rest of their family." Her puzzle turned into a smile. "You must have
been so wrapped up in your own music, you weren't even paying attention."

But I didn't remember any of that.

-------

The next time I saw Lisa was ten years later. It was after I had finished high
school with an unimpressive record. After I had gone to college to major in
music but then abandoned it (to my parents' delight) for actuarial science.
"Something practical" my father said, when I told him the happy news. Based on
the smile on his face you would have thought I had won the lottery. But I think
he just expected me to help with his taxes, not understanding the difference
between being an actuary and an accountant.

I was walking home after work, through a park, a different route than the one I
would usually take, when I saw her sitting on a bench, reading a book. "Lisa," I
said, and sat down next to her. She looked over and I saw confusion turn into
surprise and recognition on her face. She turned to put the book away into her
bag and I saw a diamond ring on her finger. "Wow," I said, "is that--?" She held
it up for me to see, and immediately I was struck how the light filtering
through the diamond looked the same as the glow of that trumpet all those years
ago. "I can't keep it secret anymore," she laughed, "I'm engaged."

"Is it--" I started to ask.

"Gary?" she laughed again. "No that was ages ago." She paused. "We were so young
back then." Another pause. "You know, I never even really liked him."

"But--" I must have given her a strange look.

She put her hand on my shoulder. "It was always you," she said. Then must have
realized what she had said and quickly pulled back. "I mean, back then," she
added.

"But you were the one who broke it off," I said.

"You really hurt me, you must know. I thought it was so special, that first time
we kissed. But then you started disappearing for days at a time to practice. I
felt I was losing you. I needed a clean break. But I was so happy it worked out
for you--at that concert. I wasn't sure I had done the right thing."

"What are you talking about?" I said.

"I knew I couldn't live myself if you failed that class. I felt it was my fault
you couldn't play well. It took all my savings and I had to borrow from my
parents against my future allowance, but it was worth it. Buying you that
trumpet was the best thing I did that whole year."
